# [React](https://github.com/rolling-scopes-school/tasks/tree/master/react) ~~Revolution~~ Evolution ðŸŒŸ

React, also known as React.js or ReactJS, is an open-source JavaScript library that emerged from Facebook's internal
workings. It was designed to help developers build fast, scalable, user-friendly interfaces for web applications with
minimal coding. React uses a declarative paradigm that simplifies the creation of complex UIs while maintaining high
performance and predictability.

The evolution of React is a testament to Facebook's vision and the collective efforts of the developer community
worldwide. The adoption and contributions by other corporations further accentuated its growth and application in modern
web development.

## The Story of React:

### 2011:

The seeds of React took root in Facebook's dynamic ecosystem. **Facebook** had a massive user base to cater to, and its
original JavaScript codebase wasn't scaling well to handle the swift updates required for the ever-growing Facebook
newsfeed.

Facebook engineer **Jordan Walke** borrowed ideas from **XHP**, an HTML component PHP framework, and used them to create
a
JavaScript library enabling the construction of reusable UI components. It's the birth of React. This library played a
transformational role in surmounting the performance bottlenecks of Facebookâ€™s News Feed.

The debut of React within Facebookâ€™s environments marked a grand shift towards component-based architecture, fostering
better speed, scalability, and efficiency. Despite being initially used internally, the successful overhaul of
Facebook's newsfeed set a promising stage for what would soon revolutionize the realm of web development.

### 2012:

In 2012, the Facebook team was still using and developing React internally, training its developers, and stress-testing
the tool's scalability and performance within its projects.

However, the significant stride of that year was **implementing React into Instagram**. After Facebook acquired
Instagram in
2012, they started using React in Instagram.com, affording Facebook a robust opportunity to further test and enhance
React before its public release.

This implementation process into Instagram led to the establishment of critical React features like Real DOM components,
Lifecycle methods, and state setting.

So, while there were no public releases of React in 2012, it was a pivotal year for its development and laid the
groundwork for its subsequent open-sourcing.

### 2013:

Public release:
Versions: 0.3.0 (May 29, 2013)â€” 0.8.0 (December 19, 2013)

In a landmark move in May, Facebook, at JSConf US, decided to open-source React. This pivotal decision unlocked a myriad
of possibilities, paving the way for developers and organizations globally to not just utilize React but also to
actively contribute to its ecosystem. It spurred created a vibrant, collaborative environment that was instrumental in
the exponential growth and development of React in the subsequent years. Now, developers from around the world could
leverage React's power, share their experience, find and fix bugs, suggest improvements, and even propose new features.
This openness that's central to the open-source software movement contributed greatly to the robustness and popularity
of React.

### 2014:

Versions: 0.9.0 (February 20, 2014)â€” 0.12.2 (December 18, 2014)

November of this year marked another significant milestone for React with the release of React 0.12.0. A major
enhancement in this update was the inclusion of **JSX syntax**, which could now be used directly within JavaScript
without
necessitating a separate preprocessor. Being a syntax extension for JavaScript, JSX allowed developers to write elements
and components using a syntax that resembled HTML. This not only improved the readability and structure of the code but
also ushered in a more intuitive and effortless coding experience, opening doors to seamless component creation and more
efficient development workflows in React.

### 2015:

Versions: 0.13.0 (March 10, 2015)â€” 0.14.5 (December 29, 2015)

**React Native** was announced at the React.js Conf in February. React Native is a mobile development framework that
allows
developers to leverage React and JavaScript-like methods for building mobile applications.

Alongside React's growth, a library called Redux was gaining popularity in managing complex state in JavaScript
applications. **Redux**, created by **Dan Abramov** and **Andrew Clark**, uses patterns inspired by the Flux
architectureâ€”introduced
by Facebook--and functional programming concepts, reducing the complexity of state mutation and application logic.

In June, at React Europe conference, Dan Abramov, presented Redux for the first time, describing it as a predictable
state container for JavaScript apps. Following this, Redux quickly became the go-to library to manage state in React
applications due to its simplicity, small size and the introduction of a single global state for the whole application
which not only made state mutations predictable but also logging, hot-reloading and time-travel debugging possible.

Despite Redux not being core to React, itâ€™s influenced a lot of patterns and practices in the React ecosystem and played
a crucial role in community engagement and the growth of React itself.

### 2016:

Versions:

- 0.14.6 (January 6, 2016)
- 15.0.0 (April 7, 2016)
- 15.4.1 (November 22, 2016)

The year 2016 ushered in a pivotal transition for React with the launch of version 15.0 in April. Underneath the hood,
this release entailed a sweeping overhaul of React's internal architecture, drastically improving its efficiency and
performance.

One of the visible enhancements of this update was the strengthened **SVG support** within the JSX syntax. Now,
developers
could seamlessly use JSX to write SVG within their React components, enhancing the ease of working with graphics and
visual content on the web.

While there was a major overhauling internally, Facebook also made conscious efforts to ensure the API stability, making
the transition smooth for developers. Hence, despite the sweeping changes under the hood, developers found little change
in their regular workflows or the APIs they were accustomed to.

Besides, this significant update also addressed error handling, making it more robust and developer-friendly. This new
error handling strategy gave developers better visibility into the internal working of their apps, leading to quicker
debugging and more stable applications.

**React 15.0** thus represented the library's continuous advancement and commitment to stay abreast of modern web
development needs and standards.

### 2017:

Versions: 15.4.2 (January 6, 2017)â€” 16.2.0 (November 28, 2017)

React's evolution continued in 2017 with a significant move in the form of adopting semantic versioning with the release
of React 15.5.0. This version brought some notable changes, notably new life-cycle hooks and improvements in error
handling.

In March, Facebook introduced version 15.5.0, which started displaying deprecation warnings for libraries that wÃ¼rde to
be removed in version 16.0. This included `React.PropTypes`, `React.createClass`, and `react-addons`. Instead of
using `React.createClass`, the JavaScript class syntax was introduced for creating components in React.

Also, the `React.PropTypes` was transferred to a separate `prop-types` library to allow other libraries to access
PropTypes without having a React dependency.

The concept of `Error Boundaries` was also introduced in 2017 to enhance the way React handles JavaScript errors in
components.

Lastly, React's **Fiber reconciler**, the new heart of React, a complete reimplementation, was rolled out as a part of
React 16. This enabled new features like fragments, error boundaries, portals, and asynchronous rendering.

September saw the official release of React 16.0 (React Fiber), a complete rewrite of React, improving perceived
responsiveness, refining the balance of how much work it can do vs. how responsive it can be.

Throughout 2017, Reactâ€™s growth trend continued and solidified its position as a premier library for building intricate
and scalable user interfaces.

### 2018:

Versions: 16.2.1 (August 1, 2018)â€” 16.7.0 (December 19, 2018)

In February, React made a monumental shift in how components could be written and managed with the release of version
16.8. It introduced an expressive **new feature - Hooks**.

Hooks were a response to the wide array of problems developers faced with classes. They were an addition to React that
let developers use state and other imperative features like lifecycle methods, context, and refs, directly inside
functional components.

For the first time, developers could use state in their components without putting them inside a class. Even more,
developers could extract component logic into testable, reusable functions improving the organization and reusability of
their components.

In addition, Hooks simplified the overall React mastery curve, offering more direct API functions with a smooth learning
slope for beginners.

Through the implementation of hooks, there was a profound impact not only on the way applications were created but also
how code was shared and reused among different components. The introduction of hooks marked a critical turning point in
the React development journey, taking a giant leap towards functional programming within React ecosystem.

### 2019:

Versions: 16.8.0 (February 6, 2019)â€” 16.12.0 (November 14, 2019)

React continued its strides in 2019 with the release of React 16.9 in August, equipped with enriched capabilities and
enhanced performance.

Enabling a more efficient debugging experience, React 16.9 came with improved support for JavaScript's built-in '
Performance.measure' function, which made profiling in React DevTools more precise and beneficial.

Additionally, it introduced 'async act()' for testing asynchronous state updates in components more
convenientlyâ€”providing a more consistent testing environment.

Moreover, this update also deprecated some lifecycle methods (componentWillMount, componentWillReceiveProps, and
componentWillUpdate), nudging developers towards safer alternatives like static getDerivedStateFromProps and
getSnapshotBeforeUpdate.

2019 was significant because it left the door ajar for one of React's most anticipated features, concurrent mode, by
introducing asynchronous rendering possibilities. Concurrent mode, although released experimentally, promised smoother
visual updates by interrupting ongoing rendering tasks to accommodate high priority updates balancely.

Thus, 2019 remarkably upped the ante for React's performance, debugging, and testing capabilities, giving developers a
robust toolkit to build more refined applications.

### 2020:

Versions: 16.13.0 (February 26, 2020)â€” 17.0.1 (October 22, 2020)

React 17.0 was released in October, primarily serving as a "stepping stone" update that allowed applications to be
updated incrementally.

React has been and continues to be one of the most important and influential tools in modern web development. Developers
continue to leverage and enjoy the benefits of speed, scalability, and simplicity it offers.

In October, the team released the much-awaited arrival of Redux Toolkit as the official, opinionated way of setting up
Redux - aiming to provide the best developer experience and simplifying a lot of Redux's "boilerplate" setup.

Throughout these years, React, with its extensible nature, kept evolving and adapting to industry changes by
incorporating state-of-the-art features, thus remaining a pivotal tool in web development. Developers continue to
leverage and enjoy the benefits of speed, scalability, and simplicity it offers. As React progresses, it will be
exciting to see what future developments bring.

### 2021:

Versions: 17.0.2 (March 22, 2021)

React version 17, mainly focuses on making it easier to upgrade React itself. Unlike previous versions,
React 17 does not introduce new developer-facing features, instead it includes changes that make future upgrades less
risky and disruptive. Some of the changes include gradual upgrades, event delegation changes, effect cleanup timing
changes, consistent error handling, and new JSX transform. Gradual upgrades allow React to co-exist with other versions
in a single page. Event delegation changes in React 17 ensure that no event handlers are attached to the document
anymore, this also improves compatibility with future React versions. Furthermore, for more consistent error handling,
React 17 uses a new mechanism which continues the component tree rendering even if there are errors in the components.
It also introduces a new JSX transform which helps in reducing bundle size.

### 2022:

Versions: 18.0.0 (March 29, 2022)â€” 18.2.0 (June 14, 2022)

React 18 introduces several significant features and updates designed to improve the user interface. The most notable
feature is automatic batching, which optimizes the process of multiple state updates, reducing the number of re-renders
and improving performance. Additionally, React 18 introduces a new Root API that supports concurrent rendering and
enhanced Suspense capabilities. It also comes with more efficient server components, which can render data directly into
the HTML for better performance and a more seamless experience. Furthermore, React 18 enhances the handling of
interruptions during rendering to ensure that priority actions, like user interactions, are not stalled by ongoing
rendering work, offering a smoother and more responsive interface. However, due to fundamental changes in the way React
performs, upgrading applications to React 18 requires careful planning. It has also introduced a community-driven
approach for testing and getting feedback on new features before stable release.

### 2024:

Versions: 19 expected

React Conf 2024 is scheduled for May 15â€“16 in Henderson, Nevada!
New features that have already landed in Canary include React Server Components, Asset Loading, Document Metadata, and
Actions.

## Links:

- React [changelog](https://github.com/facebook/react/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md)
- React
  Labs: [What We've Been Working On â€“ February 2024](https://react.dev/blog/2024/02/15/react-labs-what-we-have-been-working-on-february-2024)
- [React v17.0](https://legacy.reactjs.org/blog/2020/10/20/react-v17.html)
- A Comprehensive Guide to the Latest Features and
  Updates: [React v18.0](https://code.pieces.app/blog/react-18-a-comprehensive-guide-to-the-latest-features-and-updates)
